# The Internet Meme and the Ritual of Communication

## Introduction

The Internet meme has in recent years become an all-pervasive form of cultural communication which now "permeates many spheres of digital and nondigital expression" (Shifman, 2015, p.23). The rise of the meme coincided with what Tim O'Reilly coined as web 2.0 which was characterised by, community moderated, content-driven websites like 4chan and Reddit and blogging platforms such as WordPress and Blogger (O'Reilly, 2005). These platforms relied on user-submitted content and encouraged interaction within comment sections, giving rise to a plethora of virtual communities and an "infinite number of different, partly overlapping online subcultures" (Sveningsson, 2008).

In this essay, I explore how the participation in the creation and dissemination of Internet Memes can be seen as a ritualist practice which helps to create more cohesive virtual communities. I start by addressing key concepts, 'communities' and 'virtual communities', 'memes' and the 'internet memes', 'communication' and 'ritual'. To understand virtual communities I use Benedict Anderson's concept of the Imagined community which he proposed in his seminal book on the origins of nationalism. To address Memes I start by looking at the conceptual origins in Richard Dawkins book 'The Selfish Gene' and how his gene-based model for cultural appropriation and propagation can help our understanding of Internet Memes. I combine Emile Durkheim's views on the role of ritual with James Cary's theory of communication as ritual. I conclude by suggesting that Internet Memes act as communicatory tools mediating beliefs and ideals in large-scale anonymous communities and that they are effective in this because of their participatory nature and efficiency in communicating complex social ideas.

## Communities

There has been some contention between the notion of community as a network of concrete interpersonal relationship or as a group with a common sense of identity or characteristics. Prior to 1970, the community was almost synonymous with the neighbourhood but it had to be expanded to include more geographically distant ties, such as family, friends and coworkers (Gruzd, Wellman and Takhteyev, 2011). The online networks that we now prescribe as communities are often large and in many cases the members are anonymous (eg: Reddit, 4chan). We might then borrow  Benedict Anderson's concept of 'imagined communities', which he used to describe nationalism. He describes nations as imagined communities "because the members of even the smallest nation will never know most of their fellow members, meet them, or even hear of them, yet in the minds of each lives the image of their communion." (Anderson, 1983, p.6). Borrowing from Raymond Williams we can then talk of virtual communities as imagined communities where "a sense of common identity and characteristics" is held in the minds of the members (Williams, 1983, p.75).

## Memes

The term 'meme' was coined by Richard Dawkins in his book "The Selfish Gene" where he took the ancient Greek word 'mimeme' meaning 'imitated thing' and shortened it to rhyme with 'gene'. He was taking the genetic theory of life evolving “by the differential survival of replicating entities.” and applying the model to cultural phenomena (Dawkins, 2009, p.561). The meme like the gene is a “unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation", and examples of memes might be, "tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, ways of making pots or of building arches" (Dawkins, 2009, p.562, p.563). In Dawkins's definition memes are ideas or pieces of information stored in our minds, and drawings, photos and text are vehicles in which these ideas are transmitted. In essence "memes are idea complexes and meme vehicles are their tangible expressions" (Shifman, 2015, p.38).

There is some contention in basing the meme on the gene, genes are based on physical characteristics or phenotype's, which result from the alleles in a DNA sequence, they are an abstract concept but one based on clear physical attributes. Memes, on the other hand, have no concrete physical parallel, taking Dawkins's example of an arch building meme, although two craftsmen may possess such knowledge and skill it is not necessary for their corresponding neural pathways to be identical. An alternative model proposed by Gatherer (1998) defines a meme as:

> "an observable cultural phenomenon, such as a behaviour, artefact or an objective piece of information, which is copied, imitated or learned, and thus may replicate within a cultural system."

Gatherer's model allows us more analytic power by treating the things we see as memes not as simply the result of an ambiguous thought or idea. In both Dawkins and Gatherer's models, the success of a meme is judged by its staying power, popularity, and the speed at which it propagates (Shifman, 2015). Most Internet Memes are part of a group of related items that might use the same format, picture or idea and it is these groups or categories which propagate and persist rarely the individual text, picture or video. Because groups or categories display the memetic behaviour of Gatherers model Shifman suggests we define internet memes as:

> "a group of digital items sharing common characteristics of content, form, and/or stance, which were created with awareness of each other, and were circulated, imitated, and/or transformed via the Internet by many users."

This definition then allows us to tie our understanding of Internet Memes with the sociological theory of memetics as units of culture which can be imitated, adapted, appropriated. For this essay, I refer to the singular text, image, video as an 'individual' internet meme and I use 'internet meme' to refer to the general category or group.

## Communication & Ritual

Ritual is a word generally associated with spiritual and religious activity, Émile Durkheim argues these activities perform a specific social function one about collectively affirming beliefs and ideals. He writes at the end of his book 'The Elementry Forms of Religious Life', that the role of ritual is to synthesise the "whole world of feelings, ideas, and images" which, "mutually attract one another, repel one another, fuse together, subdivide, and proliferate" within a community of individuals (Durkheim and Fields, 1995, p.426). Essentially ritual is an activity where "collective beliefs and ideals are simultaneously generated, experienced, and affirmed as real by the community." (Bell, 2009, p.20).

Communication as a ritual was a concept proposed by James Carey as an alternative to the traditional view of communication as transmission. The communication as transmission model sees the function of communication as the transferal of information to inform, impart knowledge and control others. "A ritual view of communication is directed not toward the extension of messages in space but toward the maintenance of society in time; not the act of imparting information but the representation of shared beliefs" (Carey, 1989, p.15). He examines this further through news consumption, in the transmission model the newspaper is "an instrument for disseminating news and knowledge" in the ritualistic model reading the news is likened to attending mass. He points out that the news is just "a portrayal of the contending forces in the world" (Carey, 1989, p.16). This idea is rationalised by the fact that like religious rituals "news changes little and yet is intrinsically satisfying; it performs few functions yet is habitually consumed" (Carey, 1989, p.17). Hegel writing in the early 19th century made the same connection, "Reading the morning newspaper is the realist's morning prayer. One orients one's attitude toward the world either by God or by what the world is. The former gives as much security as the latter, in that one knows how one stands." (Hegel, 2002, p.274). The big difference between many religious rituals such as attending mass is that reading a newspaper is generally performed alone, however, the social or tribal sentiment might still exist in that "each communicant is well aware that the ceremony (s)he performs is being replicated simultaneously by thousands" (Anderson, 1983, p.35).

We might look at Instagram as a modern equivalent, the most popular categories of photos are selfies, pictures of friends and activities (Hu, Manikonda and Kambhampati, 2014). In the transmission model, we might see the participation in posting and consuming photos as being about telling your followers/friends how you look, who you are hanging out with, what you are doing. It is a small step from this view to see Instagram as encouraging a self-obsessed narcissistic culture where peoples time is spent competitively comparing themselves to others. A more optimistic view might be taken if we regard Instagram as a cultural church, a place where people can participate in a social exchange of ideas and sentimanents through the ritual of sharing images of the things and people around them. These views are not mutually exclusive as they still can perform an informational function, a banker might read the news purely to gauge the stock market, as narcist might use Instagram to feed a need for praise and validation. The question here is whether newspapers and Instagram would hold the same level of popularity if there wasn't this theorised need for a cooperative ritual within society and whether these platforms satisfy such a need.

## Conclusion

Memes are in many ways hallmarks of a participatory culture which grew out of the user-focused web pages of web 2.0 and "Like many Web 2.0 applications, memes diffuse from person to person, but shape and reflect general social mindsets" (Shifman, 2015). They are characterised by a rough, ascetic, and amateurish aesthetic meaning they take little technical skill to create and through this invite participation. Due to the affordance of combining video, image and text, Internet memes allow for the encoding of complex ideas into symbols which are simple and fast to consume. This I suggest is key to their discursive value within large and diverse communities as it allows for individuals to gather the ideas and opinions of a more representative sample. They are also predominantly satirical which is a "common strategy that supports social bonding and the maintenance of social boundaries" (Willmore and Hocking, 2017).

Imagined communities, communities that are held together by a sense of communion, of common belief and interest, need these commonalities to be maintained and updated to fit with changing cultural views in order to manage "an ongoing and fragile social process" (Carey, 1989). Within a nation, this might be seen as the role of the media, within Catholicism, the role of the Vatican but it is less obvious on the internet where in most situations there is no governing body or centralised source of discourse. It is true that there are individuals such as celebrities who act as central reference points, providing rhetoric and often fostering their own communities of followers. However in the autonomous self-governed communities where there is no clear central authority and accepting that imagined communities are held together by commonalities there must be some method of conversation mediating beliefs. I am also generally referring to larger communities as there are many where membership is in the 10s of millions and so normal conversation through messages is less viable (Redditmetrics.com, 2018).

Internet Memes offer a solution, they are able to encapsulate complex social ideas into a format which is fast and effortless to consume. They employ populist argument "and popular texts, intertwining them into a vibrant polyvocal public discourse" (Milner, 2013). If we think of ritual as the activity where beliefs are 'generated, experienced, and affirmed' then we could say the engagement in the production and dissemination of Internet Memes is a ritualistic practice. This is an argument that lacks empirical evidence and to understand fully the importance of the Internet Meme in synthesising public discourse one would need to study the difference in use between large and small scale virtual communities and compare the difference in cohesion between communities who use of Internet memes differ. What I have offered here is a way of framing their use one that sees Internet Memes not as a trivial cultural fad but as an important semiotic system that offers the opportunity for cohesive self-governed virtual communities.

### References

- Shifman, L. (2015). *Memes in digital culture*. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
- Dawkins, R. (2009). *The selfish gene*. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
- Gatherer, D. (1998). Why the Thought Contagion Metaphor is Retarding the Progress of Memetics. *Journal of Memetics*, [online] 2. Available at: http://cfpm.org/jom-emit/1998/vol2/gatherer_d.html [Accessed 1 Mar. 2018].
- Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
- O'Reilly, T. (2005). *What Is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of Software*. [online] Oreilly.com. Available at: http://www.oreilly.com/lpt/a/1 [Accessed 5 Mar. 2018].
- Gruzd, A., Wellman, B. and Takhteyev, Y. (2011). Imagining Twitter as an Imagined Community. *American Behavioral Scientist*, 55(10), pp.1294-1318.
- Sveningsson Elm, M. (2008). [Understanding and studying Internet culture(s): hybridity and interdisciplinarity](http://nordicom.statsbiblioteket.dk/ncom/en/publications/understanding-and-studying-internet-cultures(a1d01590-c2b9-11dd-8e59-000ea68e967b).html) *Nordicom Review*, vol 29, no. 2, pp. 85-90.
- Bell, C. (2009). *Ritual Theory, Ritual Practice*. Oxford University Press.
- Carey, J. (2008). A Cultural Approach to Communication. In:*Communication as culture*. New York, NY [u.a.]: Routledge.
- Hu, Y., Manikonda, L. and Kambhampati, S. (2014). What We Instagram: A First Analysis of Instagram Photo Content and User Types. *International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media*. [online] Available at: https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM14/paper/view/8118.
- Williams, R. (1983). *Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society*. Oxford University Press.
- Hegel, G. and Stewart, J. (2002). *Miscellaneous writings of G.W.F. Hegel*. Evanston (Illinois): Northwestern University Press, p.247.
- Willmore, J. and Hocking, D. (2017). Internet Meme Creativity as Everyday Conversation. *Journal of Asia-Pacific Pop Culture*, 2(2), pp.140-166.
- Redditmetrics.com. (2018). Top subreddits by subscribers, largest subreddits - reddit metrics. [online] Available at: http://redditmetrics.com/top [Accessed 8 Mar. 2018].
- Durkheim, E. and Fields, K. (1995). *The elementary forms of the religious life*. New York: Free Press.
- Milner, R. (2013). Pop Polyvocality: Internet Memes, Public Participation, and the Occupy Wall Street Movement. *International Journal of Communication*, [online] 7, p.34. Available at: http://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/view/1949/1015.

```json
{
    "date": "08/03/2018",
    "description": "Instagram as a cultural church, a place where people can participate in society through the ritual of sharing images of the things and people around them"
}
```

